*** General observations ***

The thing that surprises me is that someone seems to wants a real
election.  It appears to me that Beijing and their allies in Hong Kong
have concluded that 2012 was a success and they want to open up the
system more.

Going forward, the key area that people need to look at is the actual
procedures for nomination, and all of the proposals by the
pro-establishment party will result in a real election.  The fact that
Beijing and pro-establishment wants elections (although obviously in
terms favorable to them) gives the opposition some bargaining power.
If it were the case that the goal was to blunt demands for universal
suffrage, then the pan-democrats wouldn't have that much bargaining
power because if something went wrong and there was no universal
suffrage, the desired outcome would be the one that Beijing wanted
anyway.  However, the tone of the CE reports and the pro-establishment
parties submissions seems to indicate that they want universal
suffrage, and if it is the case that they really want it, that gives
the pan-dems some more leverage to hold out for acceptable terms.

One thing that I find interesting is that someone asked in the
consultation document "so what if after the election, Beijing decides
not to appoint the elected candidate as CE" and the tactful answer
from everyone seems to be "Beijing can kindly stuff it."  (The CE
report mentioned that no one responded to the question.  What I think
that means in this case is that the people did respond to the question
outside the printed record.)

*** What has already been decided...... ***

Someone in the "establishment" wants universal suffrage in Hong Kong
very badly.  Yes it's propaganda but they are using much stronger
language than necessary for propaganda purposes.  My guess is that the
person that is pushing for "real" elections is CY Leung himself, and
he has the backing of Beijing.  One way of seeing that this is coming
from CY Leung himself is that almost all of the rest of the report
repeats phrases form other documents.  Paragraph 5, is the only
paragraph that includes new language.  What Paragraph 5 says is "I
want elections and Beijing is backing me up."

The one thing that is absolutely firm, and is the only thing that I
can see that looks like an "order" from Beijing is that there be a
nominations committee and the NC actually have the real power to
decide nominations.  I think this is coming directly from Beijing
since none of the HK local parties, mention this very strongly, and
the CE is so intent at finding a HK justification for this (i.e. but
the HK Law Society thinks so), that this is obviously a non-negotiable
condition from Beijing.

The code words that I'm expecting to see in the NPCSC response are
that "strictly follow the Basic Law."  How explicitly the NPCSC
response mentions this condition will also be interesting.  In
particular, if the NPCSC mentions this condition in detail, that means
that people are still arguing over it, whereas if it doesn't that
means that people have "gotten the hint" and are looking for other
things.

The second thing that has been "mostly" decided is that the
nominations committee consist of the current electoral committee plus
a number of new seats.  It's unlikely that a proposal that would
involve a nominations committee that involves anything very different
from the current EC will be viable.  One thing that is would be
interesting to see is if the NPCSC response inserts a condition on
this.  It's not clear to me how much of this comes from Beijing and
how much of this comes from Hong Kong.  In any event, "civic
nominations" is off the table, and I think any effort to find
something that is radically different from the current electoral
committee (i.e. having one sector be open to district elections) would
be neither "fish nor fowl" and would please no one.

***What hasn't been decided yet.....***

There are three key things that do not seem to have been decided yet,
and non coincidentially, each of the three things are of interest to a
different part of the pan-democrat alliance.

1) Nominations procedure
Most important to large pan-dems

The most important thing that has not been decided is the actual
nominations procedure, and I believe that this will be the key thing
that be negotiated.  You will have two or more candidates on the
ballot, and but the big question is how likely it is that one of those
candidates will be a pan-democrat, and you make it absolute certain or
almost impossible or anything in between that you will see a
pan-democrat on the ballot by changing the rules.

We can take as reference the DAB proposal for the nominations
procedure.  If you need two to three candidates with a majority vote,
it will be difficult (although not entirely impossible) for a
pan-democrat to get onto the ballot, and it would be rather easy for
Beijing to prevent a pan-dem from the final ballot.  I can imagine a
situation in which Beijing is desperately trying to find some
candidate to make sure that both spots include a pan-establishment
candidate.

Or maybe not, it's not clear here whether or not Beijing can live with
a pan-dem CE.  The reason that you can see that this has not been
decided yet is that some of the pro-establishment parties have
proposed nominations procedures with zero threshold (i.e. top two or
three vote getters will get themselves on the ballot).  In that
system, one of the candidates will almost certainly be a pan-democrat.
By contrast setting a threshold that the two candidates must have 50%
support on the committee makes it almost impossible for there to be a
pan-dem on the ballot.  Setting the threshold anywhere from zero to
50% will adjust how difficult it will be to have a pan-dem, and how
much a pan-dem will need to "compromise" to get on the ballot.

The difficulty here for the pan-dems, is that you can't actually
campaign for changes by saying "I want to be CE."  It looks bad.  You
can't use ICCPR or legal arguments, because the proposals will give
voters a real choice, just not your choice.  Also, you have a split
between pan-dems that really want to be CE, and those that are more
interested in being permanent protesters.

I think this is going to be the main topic of the negotiations.  I
think the code word that the pan-dems could use to say "I want to be
CE" is "diversity of opinion" and "inclusive electoral process." The
code word for "I don't want you to be CE" is (ironically) "principle
of majority rule" or "consensus across the community."  Right now
Beijing hasn't weighed in yet, and I don't think that CY Leung has an
opinion.

One other code word that the DAB used is "solemnity of process" this
is a code word for "we don't want the nominations committee to turn
into a circus like Legco."  

You can get the larger pan-dem parties to support the package if you
can get that is to offer them the realistic possibility of being CE.
Beijing could be persuaded to that the larger pan-dems are not going
to declare independence or do anything crazy, and once they get in
CE's chair, they will have things thrown at them.

2) Composition of the electoral committee.
Most important to professional pan-democrats and Occupy Central

All of the parties in HK seem to agree that if there has to be a
nominations committee and if that nominations committee has to be
something like the similar one then you will need more seats for
non-represented groups.  This is something that Beijing does not care
about, the pro-establishment parties are for, and the pan-democrats
would agree to if it becomes obvious that there is going to be an
nominations committee.

The question is now about the details.  The professional pan-dems
would see this as attractive because it gets their input in the
nominations committee.

3) "Civic recommendations"
Most important to protest pan-democrats

Civic nominations are off the table, but civic recommendations are
not.  Once we have a nominations procedure agreed, I think it would be
rather straightforward to put in a civic recommendation system by
people people can officially recommend people to the nominations
committee.  Whether this gets in I think depends on whether or not it
will do any good to get the package passed.  If you are in a situation
where the protest pan-democrats are of the position "civic nominations
or nothing" then Beijing and its allies gain nothing by conceding this
issue.

Conversely, I can see a situation in which the large pan-democrats
want to make it too easy to get a pan-dem on the ballot, at which
point Beijing may reach out to a one or two of the protest
pan-democrats and offer civic recommendation.  

4) Interaction effects.

There are some interaction effects between these three issues.  For
example, the Beijing and pro-establishment parties will find it easier
to agree to a mechanism of "civic recommendations" if it is in fact
difficult to get someone unacceptable on the final ballot.  Small
numbers of seats on the nominations committee could make a big or
small difference depending on the electoral procedure.

*** Who is making the decisions? ***

The main drivers of the decision making are the political parties in
Legco, particularly the pro-establishment parties.  Pretty much the
entire report was made in reference to Legco suggestions.  I'm getting
the sense that the Chief Executive is acting rather passively, and
organizing ideas that come from Legco and merging them in with
Beijing's and the pan-dems.

Aside from that, I've been reading the comments very closely to see
what decisions are being made in Beijing and what decisions are being
made by the pro-establishment parties in Hong Kong.  One way of doing
this is to carefully read what is being said and who is said it.
There are things in which the pro-establishment parties are largely on
the same page (i.e. we want an nominations committee) and things for
which they differ (i.e. there are some important differences in the
suggested process for CE nominations).

The one thing that is not clear to me is who is who is so enthusiatic
to have universal suffrage.  It's either CY Leung himself or Beijing
that is actually pushing for them, because the pro-establishment
parties seem a bit luke-warm about elections.  Also, the decision to
bring up legislative election procedure and then the decision to not
amend them was a very curious one.

* What next?

The response will be an NPCSC determination.  This will be very
important. 

Things to look for:

1) How explicitly the NPCSC are going say "no civic nominations"?  At
the minimum you will see some language about "strictly following the
Basic Law."  Anything more severe and that suggests that people on the
pan-dem side are still holding out for some hope of "civic
nominations".

2) How explicitly the NPCSC is going to insist on no "fundamental
changes" to the nominations committee?  It's not clear to me how much
this is coming from Hong Kong and how much it is coming from Beijing.

3) How explicitly does the NPCSC state that this isn't the final
package?  The code word here is "gradual realization of democracy".  

4) Other conditions.  Whether or not there will be any explicit
conditions against "civic recommendations"?  

5) If there are any other conditions, what are the justification?

6) Are there any code words that suggest that the Beijing would or
would not find a pan-democratic CE objectionable?  The code word that
Beijing has used up to now has been "patriotic" but they have
explicitly and publicly stated that "some pan-democrats are
patriotic."  The code words that I'm looking for that says that
Beijing doesn't trust the pan-dems are "consensus" or "acceptable to a
majority of the community" and "avoid divisiveness."  If I see the
terms like "inclusive" or "diversity" I'd be shocked.

* What next? *

There are two conditions that they must have.

a) 2/3 support in Legco
b) general public support

What a) means is getting enough votes in Legco to pass the package,
and I think they can get it.

What b) means is no mass demonstrations that will shut down the city.
At this point, I think it's clear that Occupy does not have the public
support needed to block a deal if it passes Legco.  If it does mass
demonstrations, then the HKSAR government has the public support to
clear the demonstrations and ignore Occupy.

* Friendly suggestions for Occupy from an "enemy". *

I'm actually an enemy of Occupy Central since I'm the type of guy that
they are protesting against, but I have the following suggestions....

a) insist that the CE election procedures are time limited.  The
easiest way of insuring this is to draft the bill so that they apply
*only* to the 2017 and 2022 elections.  That means that in 2027 we
argue about this some more.

b) insist on seats for students and student protest groups on the
nominations committee, and insist that students decide how those seats
will be filled.  This is important because this will open the door to
seats in Legco. 

c) insist on seats on the Nominations Committee for bank office
workers which may ultimately result on FC seats for financial workers
(i.e. what Patten tried to do in 1994).  The reason for this is that
this gives you an excuse for protesting in Central and puts you in a
situation where you are protesting on behalf of office workers in
Central and not against them.


*** Specific annotations ***

Paragraph 5.

This is an interesting paragraph.  It's the only place in the document
where I think CY Leung is speaking personally.  What CY Leung is
saying here is *I* want universal suffrage and I have the backing of
Beijing to get it.  This paragraph I think shows why elections are
important.  I suspect that if Henry Tang had been elected, that this
paragraph would have been written differently.  One reason I think
that this paragraph is coming directly from CY Leung is that it uses
Hong Kong terminology for certain things (i.e. political reform)
rather than Mainland terminology.  The other reason that I think this
is CY Leung speaking is that it's new language.

While CY Leung is driving the process, it's clear also that Beijing is
backing him, and is giving him a blank check subject to the one
condition which is that there be a nominations committee.

Paragraph 6-7.  Repeating the consultation document.

Paragraph 10.

Ordering is very important in these sorts of documents, and one thing
that seems pretty apparent is that the main set of opinions that
matter are people from Legco.  There are bits of this report that are
seem copied from the summaries of the parties in the Legco report.

One other thing is that I think in figuring out what the final
government bill will looking like, we should focus on the DAB
proposals.

Paragraph 11.

iv) "love the Country and loves Hong Kong" is a well known code word.
What's important here is that Beijing has said that some of the
pan-dems "love the Country."

v) Putting this first means that there is a bottom line.  No direct
civic nominations.  Also, the fact that they are using a legal
justification for this means non-opposition on the part of the legal
community.  The other interesting thing is that if you reference this
to 3.41 of the legislative report, they are not ruling out "civic
recommendations."

This is also very interesting that they are using a legal argument.
This is obviously a condition that Beijing has set up.  For face
reasons, Leung has to make it look "local" so the question is how does
he go about doing it.

One since that I'm getting is that the pro-establishment parties don't
care that mich that you have a nominations committee, so you can't use
that as a justification.  Also using a legal agreement, keeps the
Article 23 scenario from happening.  In Article 23, the first group of
people that objected was the legal community, and once the legal
community went, then you had the finance community, and once they
went, then Beijing caved in.

What I think is significant here is that "there will be a nominations
committee" and that the CE must "love the country, and love Hong Kong"
are the only two conditions that Beijing seems to have placed.

vi) It looks obvious here that the nominations committee will look
something like the current electoral committee with perhaps some extra
members and a more open voting system, It will be interesting to see
whether the NPCSC response puts any limits on this.

Looking at the responses from the Legco parties, the pro-establishment
want to turn the electoral committee into a nominations committee.
There are some proposals that are a compromise between civic
nominations and a nominations committee, but they don't look viable.

So given that we are going to have a nominations commitee that looks
like the electoral committee, the question is what will the minor
differences be, and what the nominations/voting procedure will be.
One thing that I find interesting is that all of the pro-establishment
parties seem to support more seats on the nominations committee.

The magic number of 1600 seems to be adding another 400 seats.

vii) I think that the nominations process is going to be the area
where you will see the most controversy.  There are two issues.  First
is the relatively non-controversial question of how someone would get
submitted to the committee.  This is relatively non-controversial
since it doesn't affect who is on the ballot.

The more interesting question is what is the procedure for deciding
who gets on the ballot.  In that area, we need to look very carefully
at the different proposals by the different political parties.  The
larger pro-establishment parties seem  to support a multi-vote system
in which a candidate must have a majority of the NC to get on the
ballot.  This is likely to result in the pan-dems getting shut out,
and you having a race between two establishment candidates.  The
smaller pro-establishment parties are proposing a system  in which you
can get a nominations with less than a majority, and this will result
in at least the possibility of the pan-dems getting on the ballot.

One good result from this is that all of the proposals envision voters
having some real choice.  In none of the proposals would be it likely
for there to be a one candidate selection.

ix) The idea that there needs to be a two-round voting system seems to
be surprisingly uncontroversial and this is something that goes across
the political spectrum.

As far as what was not mentioned.

No one seems to care if the CE is a member of a political party or
not. The signficance of this seems to be that no one cares what party
the CE belongs to as long as he is not a member of the Communist
Party.

The other thing is that everyone seems to think that for the Central
Government to refuse to appoint an elected CE is unthinkable.  So no
comments in that area.

* Legislative Elections.

The result of the CE report is that there are going to be no changes
in legislative elections in 2016.  One consequence of this is that
regardless of how  the CE election goes in 2017, there are going to
likely have to deal with a pro-establishment Legco.



